Mattu University
College of Engineering and Technology
Department of Computer Science
Fundamentals of Database Systems
Chapter 2: Database System Architecture
Compiled by: Dejene B(MSc)
1
Outline
✓Data models, Schema and Instances
✓Database management system
✓DBMS Architecture and data independence
✓Database management system language and interfaces
2
Data models, Schema, and Instances
▪ Data model a collection of concepts that can be used to describe the structure of a
database, the operations for manipulating these structures, and certain constraints that
the database should obey.
▪ Structure of the database means: The data types,relationships and Constraints that
applied to the data.
▪ Dynamic aspect or behavior of a database application.
▪ There are two basic components of the database. The two components are:
1. the definition of the Relation or the Table and
2. the actual data stored in each table.
3
Data Model Operations
▪ These operations are used for specifying database retrievals and updates by referring
to the constructs of the data model.
▪ Operations on the data model may include :
✓basic model operations (e.g. generic insert, delete, update) and
✓user-defined operations (e.g. compute_student_gpa, update_inventory)
4
Data model structure and constraints
✓Constructs are used to define the database structure.
✓Constructs typically include elements as well as groups of elements (eg. Entity, record,
table) and relationship among those groups.
Constraints:- specify some restrictions on valid data, these constraints must be enforced
all times.
5
Categories of data model
✓Conceptual/high-level
✓Representational/implementation data models
✓Physical/low-level data models
Conceptual data model:-
✓Provide concepts that are close to the way any users perceive data.
✓Also called entity-based or object based data model.
▪ Three basic concepts of conceptual data model are:
✓Entity: real world thing
✓Attributes: properties or characteristics of an entity
✓Relationship: association between two entities
6
Cont..
Example:
▪ Customer and Product are two entities. Customer number and name are attributes of
the Customer entity
▪ Product name and price are attributes of product entity
▪ Sale is the relationship between the customer and product
7
Cont..
▪ Characteristics of conceptual data model:
✓Offers Organization-wide coverage of the business concepts.
✓This type of Data Models are designed and developed for a business audience.
✓The conceptual model is developed independently of hardware specifications like data
storage capacity, location or software specifications like DBMS vendor and
technology.
✓The focus is to represent data as a user will see it in the “real world.”
8
Cont..
Representational/implementation data model:
✓This type of data model is used to represent only the logical part of the database and does
not represent the physical structure of the databases.
✓The representational data model allows us to focus primarily, on the design part of the
database.
✓A popular representational model is Relational model.
9
Cont..
Physical data model:
✓Provide
concepts that describe details of how data is stored in the computer.
✓It is representation of a data design as implemented, intended to be implemented in the
DBMS.
✓It has all the information of the format in which the file are present, and
✓The structure of the databases, presence of external data structures and their relationships.
:
Example
10
Cont..
Characteristics of physical data model:
✓The physical data model describes data need for a single project or application
though it maybe integrated with other physical data models based on project scope.
✓Data Model contains relationships between tables that which addresses cardinality
and nullability of the relationships.
✓Developed for a specific version of a DBMS, location, data storage or technology
to be used in the project.
✓Columns should have exact datatypes, lengths assigned and default values.
✓Primary and Foreign keys, views, indexes, access profiles, and authorizations,
etc. are defined.
11
12
Schema and Instances
▪ Database schema:- description of database is called database schema.
✓It describes how data is structured.
✓Specifies name of relation and collection of attributes.
✓Specified during database design and should not be changed unless
during maintenance.
▪ Schema construct: Each object in the schema such as student, course are
schema construct.
13
Cont..
▪ Example of database schema
14
Cont..
Database instances/snapshot/extension:
▪ Also known as current set of occurrences.
▪ The data in the database at a particular moment in time is called
instance.
▪ Changes rapidly
15
Cont..
Example of
database instances:
16
Database Management System
▪ Database Management System (DBMS) is a Software package used for providing
EFFICIENT, CONVENIENT and SAFE MULTI-USER storage of and access to
.
MASSIVE amounts of PERSISTENT data
▪ A DBMS also provides a systematic method for:
✓creating,
✓updating,
✓storing,
✓retrieving data in a database.
17
cont...
Having this in mind, a full scale DBMS should at least have the following services to
provide to the user.
✓Data storage, retrieval and update in the database
✓A user accessible catalogue .
✓Concurrency Control Services: access and update on the database by different users
simultaneously should be implemented correctly.
✓Recovery Services: a mechanism for recovering the database after a failure must be
available.
18
cont...
▪ Authorization Services (Security): must support the implementation of access
and authorization service to database administrator and users.
▪ Integrity Services:
✓Services to promote data independency between the data and the application
▪ Utility services: sets of utility service facilities like
✓Importing data
✓Statistical analysis support
✓Index reorganization
✓Garbage collection
19
DBMS architecture and data independence
▪ A DBMS architecture allows dividing the database system into individual components
that can be independently modified, changed, replaced, and altered.
▪ It describes how data in the database is viewed by the users.
▪ It is not concerned with how the data is handled and processed by the DBMS.
20
Conti..
▪ This enables the users to manipulate the data without worrying about where it is located
or how it is actually stored.
▪ In this architecture, the overall database description can be defined at three levels,
namely,
✓internal,
✓conceptual, and
✓external levels,
and thus, named three-level DBMS architecture.
▪ This architecture is proposed by ANSI/SPARC (American National Standards Institute/Standards
Planning and Requirements Committee) and hence, is also known as ANSI/SPARC architecture.
21
DBMS Architecture
▪ The three schema-architecture
22
Cont..
▪ Internal level:
✓Describes physical storage structure of the database and also known as
physical level.
✓At this level, various aspects are considered to achieve optimal runtime
performance and storage space utilization. These aspects include:
▪ Storage space allocation techniques for data and indexes, access
paths such as indexes, data compression and encryption techniques,
and record placement.
23
Cont..
Conceptual level:
▪ Describes structure of the whole database for the whole users.
▪ It describes what data is stored in the database and relationship among the
data.
External level:
▪ Describes part of database of interest to a particular user group.
▪ It is users view of the database.
▪ Different users have their own customized view of the database.
24
Cont..
▪ To understand the three-schema architecture, consider the three levels of
the BOOK file in Online Book database as shown below:
25
Data independence
▪ One of the main advantage of the three-schema architecture is it provides
data independence.
▪ Data independence is the ability to change the schema at one level of the
database system without having to change the schema at the other level.
26
DBMS languages and Interfaces
❖Because a database supports a number of user groups, as mentioned previously, the
DBMS must have languages and interfaces that support each user group.
❖DDL(data definition language), used by the DBA and database designers to define the
conceptual and internal schemas.
✓Commands for setting up schema or intention of the database.
✓These commands are used to setup a database, create, delete, and alter table with
the facility of handling constraints.
27
DBMS languages and Interfaces
✓SDL(storage definition language):is used to specify the internal schema.
✓VDL(view definition language):is used to specify the user views and their mappings to
the conceptual schema.
✓DML(data manipulation language):Manipulations include retrieval, insertion, deletion
and modification.
28
Cont..
DBMS Interfaces: The following are some DBMS interfaces,
▪ Menu-Based Interfaces for Web Clients or Browsing
✓Present users with list of options (menus)
✓Lead user through formulation of request
✓Query is composed of selection options from menu displayed by system.
▪ Forms-Based Interfaces
✓Displays a form to each user.
✓User can fill out form to insert new data or fill out only certain entries.
✓Designed and programmed for naïve users as interfaces to canned transactions.
29
Cont..
❖Graphical User Interfaces
✓Displays a schema to the user in diagram form. The user can specify a query by
manipulating the diagram. GUIs use both forms and menus.
❖Natural Language Interfaces
✓Accept requests in written English, or other and attempt to understand them.
✓Interface has its own schema, and a dictionary of important words. Uses the
schema and dictionary to interpret a natural language request.
30
Cont..
❖Interfaces for Parametric Users
✓ Parametric users have small set of operations they perform.
✓ Analysts and programmers design and implement a special interface for each
class of naïve users.
✓ Often a small set of commands included to minimize the number of keystrokes
required. (I.e. function keys)
31
Cont..
❖Interfaces for the DBA
✓Systems contain privileged commands only for DBA staff.
✓Include commands for creating accounts, setting parameters, authorizing
accounts, changing the schema, reorganizing the storage structures etc.
✓Database System Environment
32
End of Chapter 2
.
!
u
o
Y
k
n
a
h
T
33
Indiviual Assignment(5%)
#Do all the questions below accordingly
1). Describe clearly the Centralized and Client-server DBMS Architecture?
2). Describe the following DBMS tier Architecture
a) 1-tier DBMS architecture
b) 2-tier DBMS architecture
c) 3-tier DBMS architecture
3). To design and use a database, there will be the interaction or integration of
database system components. Therefore explain clearly and briefly the DBMS
components and how they interacting each other?
34