Fundamentals of Database Systems
Mattu University
College of Engineering and Technology
Department of Computer Science
Chapter 1: Introduction to Database Systems
Compiled by: Dejene B (MSc )
1
Outline
✓Introduction
✓ Data, Information, and Metadata
✓File-Based Approach
✓Database Approach
✓Database Development Process
✓Database Users (Actors on the scene)
✓Summary
2
Introduction
✓What do you think a database system is?
✓ How many of you have seen a database?
✓ What kind of database do you know?
✓ Think of some (real life) examples of database system?
❖
Why do you need to study database?-->
✓ Because, everybody needs it.
✓It is an integral part of our day to day life.
3
Basic Definitions
✓A database is nothing more than a collection of shared information/data that exists
over a long period of time, often many years.
✓ Database is a collection of interrelated data.
What is data? Data is known facts that can be recorded and have an implicit meaning.
✓The term database refers to a collection of data that is managed by a DBMS.
✓Database systems are designed to manage large data set in an organization.
4
Cont..
✓The database is an integrated collection of facts about an organization.
✓Organization can be a University or a department in a University , Insurance
companies, manufacturing companies, Banks, Airlines, Telecommunications,
Governmental and Non-governmental Organizations, Research institutions ,etc.
✓The database is used as a central data source for other applications
5
Data
✓The term data refers to known raw facts about things like people, places, events and
concepts:
✓Sources of data: careful observation, experiment and research .
✓Data can exist in the form of text, graphics, images, audio and/or video
Data in context
6
Flow of Data
✓Data Information Knowledge Action
✓Summarizing the Data
✓ Averaging the data
✓Graphing the data
✓Adding Context
✓Information is the processed data presented in a form suitable for human
interpretation.
✓The same data can be processed in a variety of ways to generate different kinds
of information.
✓Information is important for ‘informed decision making’ .
7
Metadata
➢Metadata is data about data.
✓For further understanding of large collection of data an additional description of the
data is very important
✓It increases the usability of the data – Self-describing nature of databases
Metadata
8
Cont...
Database systems :- are designed to manage large data set in an organization.
Today, Databases are essential to every business.
They are used:
✓To maintain internal records,
✓To present data to customers and clients on the , and
World-Wide-Web
✓ To support many other commercial processes.
9
Evolution of Database Systems
▪ Data management passes through the different levels of development along with the
development in technology and services.
▪ Also the approaches to change data to information takes this level of process:we can
classify into the following three basic approaches:
✓ Manual approach
✓ Traditional file based approach
✓ Database approach
10
Evolution of Database Systems
➢ The Manual Approach
✓In the manual approach, data storage and retrieval follows the primitive and
traditional way of information handling where cards and paper are used for
the purpose.
✓The data storage and retrieval will be performed using human labor.
➢Files for as many event and objects as the organization are used to store
information.
➢Each of the files containing various kinds of information is labeled and stored in
one or more cabinets.
11
The Manual Approach (
Continued..)
➢Limitations of the Manual Approach
✓Prone to error
✓Difficult to update, retrieve, integrate
✓You have the data but it is difficult to compile the information
✓Limited to small size information
✓Cross referencing is difficult
12
Traditional File-Based Approach
✓File based systems were an early attempt to computerize the manual filing system.
This approach is the decentralized computerized data handling method.
✓Since every application defines and manages its own data, the system is subjected
to serious data duplication problem
13
cont...
❖Example:
University
File-Based System
14
Limitations of File-Based Approach
❖ Much efforts for adhoc query answering:
✓What is the average grade for Mr. Said's students?
✓List the activities for all students enrolled in CSE309.
✓Which personnel are students as well as staff?
❖Other limitations:
✓Duplication of data
✓Data dependency
✓Slow development, high maintenance and fixed queries.
15
Cont..
The most significant problem experienced by the traditional file based approach of data
handling are the following three types of anomalies;
✓Modification Anomalies: a problem experienced when one ore more data value is
modified on one application program but not on others containing the same data set.
✓Deletion Anomalies: a problem encountered where one record set is deleted from
one application but remain untouched in other application programs.
✓ Insertion Anomalies: a problem experienced when ever there is new data item to be
recorded, and the recording is not made in all the applications.
16
Database Approach
• Database is just a computerized record keeping system or a kind of electronic
filing cabinet.
• It is a shared collection of logically related data designed to meet the information
needs of an organization. Since it is a shared corporate resource, the database is
integrated with minimum amount of or no duplication.
• Database is a collection of logically related data where these logically related data
comprises entities, attributes, relationships, and business rules of an organization's
information.
17
Cont..
▪ Limitations of file-based approach tell us that: –
✓Parameters defining data should be separately stored.
✓There should be a way to control and manipulate data in isolation of the
application program.
▪ A database system can be defined as the combination of a database and a DBMS.
▪ DBMS is a powerful tool or Software for creating and manipulating database.
▪ Examples of DBMS:
✓ Oracle
✓ MS SQL Server
✓ MS Access
✓ PostgreSQL
✓ MySQL
18
Typical DBMS Functionalities
▪ Define a particular database in terms of its data types, structures, and constraints.
▪ Construct or Load the initial database contents on a secondary storage medium.
▪ Manipulating the database:
▪ Retrieval: Querying, generating reports
▪ Modification: Insertions, deletions and updates to its content
▪ Accessing the database through Web applications
▪ Processing and Sharing by a set of concurrent users and application programs – yet,
keeping all data valid and consistent.
19
Cont..
• Other features:
✓Protection or Security measures to prevent unauthorized access
✓Presentation and Visualization of data
✓Maintaining the database and associated programs over the lifetime of the database
application: Called database, software, and system maintenance.
Because of the advantages offered by a DBMS, businesses and organizations prefer the
database approach than the file-based approach.
20
Why Database Approach?
✓User
requirements are constantly changing
✓Ad hoc questions need rapid answers
✓Need to reduce long lead times and high cost in new application development. Lead time
is the latency between the initiation and execution of a process.
✓Data sharing throughout the organization
✓Need to improve data consistency and access control
✓Ease of application development and reduced development time
21
Cont..
• A database system consists of:
✓ Data (the database)
✓ Software
✓ Hardware
✓ Users
• We focus mainly on the software
• Database systems allow users to:
✓ Store
✓ Update
✓ Retrieve
✓ Organize
✓ Protect
their data.
22
Example: University’s Database System
Database
Administrator
Or System
Developer
23
University Database (Cont..)
▪ Mini-world for a University Database example: Part of a UNIVERSITY environment.
Some mini-world entities
:
– Students
– PRE-REQUISITE Courses
– Courses
– Departments
– Instructors
24
University Database (Cont..)
❖Some mini-world relationships:
–
STUDENTs take COURSEs
– COURSEs have PRE-REQUISITE COURSEs
– INSTRUCTORs teach COURSEs
– COURSEs are offered by DEPARTMENTs
– STUDENTs major in DEPARTMENTs
Note: The above (Entities and Relationship) could be expressed in the Entityrelationship data model.
25
Simple Database Example
A database that stores
student and course
information
.
26
Main Characteristics of the Database Approach
▪ Self-describing nature of a database system
: A DBMS catalog stores the description
of the database. (The description is called meta-data). This allows the DBMS software to work
with different databases.
▪ Insulation between programs and data:
Called program-data independence. Allows
changing data storage structures and operations without having to change the DBMS access
programs.
▪ Data Abstraction
: A data model is used to hide storage details and present the users with a
conceptual view of the database.
27
Cont..
❖Support
of multiple views of the data: Each user may see a different view of the
database, which describes only the data of interest to that user.
❖ Sharing of data and multi-user transaction processing: allowing a set of concurrent
users to retrieve and to update the database.
❖Concurrency control within the DBMS guarantees that each transaction is correctly
executed or completely aborted.
❖OLTP (Online Transaction Processing) is a major part of database applications.
28
Benefits of Using Database Approach
✓Data can be shared: two or more users can access and use same data instead of storing data
in redundant manner for each user.
✓Improved accessibility of data: by using SQL, the users can easily access data without
programming experience.
✓Redundancy can be reduced: isolated data is integrated in database to decrease the
redundant data stored at different applications.
✓Quality data can be maintained: the different integrity constraints in the database approach
will maintain the quality leading to better decision making.
29
Cont..
✓ Transaction support can be provided: basic demands of any transaction support systems
are implanted in a full scale DBMS.
✓ Integrity can be maintained: data at different applications will be integrated together
with additional constraints to facilitate shared data resource.
✓ Security majors can be enforced: the shared data can be secured by having different
levels of clearance and other data security mechanisms.
✓ Improved decision support: the database will provide information useful for decision
making.
30
Cont..
✓ Standards can be enforced: the different ways of using and dealing with data by different unite
of an organization can be balanced and standardized by using database approach.
✓ Compactness: since it is an electronic data handling method, the data is stored compactly (no
voluminous papers).
✓ Speed: data storage and retrieval is fast as it will be using the modern fast computer system.
✓ Less labor: unlike the other data handling methods, data maintenance will not demand much
resource.
✓ Centralized information control: since relevant data in the organization will be stored at one
repository, it can be controlled and managed at the central level.
31
Disadvantages of Using the Database Approach
✓Introduction of new professional and specialized personnel.
✓Complexity in designing and managing data
✓The cost and risk during conversion from the old to the new system
✓High cost to be incurred to develop and maintain the system
✓Complex backup and recovery services from the users perspective
✓High impact on the system when failure occurs to the central system.
32
When Not to Use a DBMS?
• Main inhibitors (costs) of using a DBMS:
✓High initial investment and possible need for additional hardware.
✓Overhead for providing generality, security, concurrency control, recovery, and
integrity functions.
• When a DBMS may be unnecessary:
✓If the database and applications are simple, well defined, and not expected to change.
✓If there are stringent real-time requirements that may not be met because of DBMS
overhead.
✓If access to data by multiple users is not required.
33
Cont..
▪ When no DBMS may suit/suffice :
▪ If the database system is not able to handle the complexity of data because of
modeling limitations
▪ If the database users need special operations not supported by the DBMS.
34
Database Development Process
1. Enterprise modeling
– Describes the data needed for database system
– The real world is so complex and modeling an enterprise ,
or even a part of it is not an easy task
– Background knowledge of the organization is very important
2. Conceptual database modeling:
– Entity-relationship (E-R) modeling
3. Logical database design:
– Relational data modeling is used to transform the
E-R diagram into a relational schema
4. Physical database design and creation:
– Detailed specification of data elements, data types, indexing options ,etc.
– Selection of software (DBMS) and hardware
35
Users Involved in Database Systems
❖They can be divided into two:
– Actors on the Scene
– Workers behind the Scene
Actors on the Scene
– Those who actually use and control the content of the data in the database
– They include the DBA,DB Designers, End Users, Software Engineers
❖Workers behind the Scene
–
Those who design and develop the DBMS and System Environment
–
They don’t use the database for their own purpose
36
Summary
✓Definitions of Database and Database Applications
✓Basic Definitions
✓Typical DBMS Functionality
✓Example of a Database (UNIVERSITY)
✓Main Characteristics of the Database Approach
✓Advantages of Using the Database Approach
✓When Not to Use Databases
✓Database Users
37
End of Chapter One!
38