Mettu University
Fundamentals of Database System
Chapter 3: Entity Relationship Model
Compiled by: Diriba G. (MSc. in CSE)
1
Outline
Introduction to ER model

ER Model Components

Entity

Attributes

Relationships

ER diagram Notations

The ER Diagram

Mapping ER models to relational tables

2
ER Model: Introduction
ER Model is a high level or conceptual model
The ER model is used to define the data elements and relationships for a
specified system.
It develops conceptual design for the database. It also develops a very
simple and easy to design view of data.
In ER modeling, the database structure is portrayed as a diagram called ER
diagram.
3
Simple ER model examples
What did you understand from the above ER models?
4
Components of ER model
5
Entity
Entities are specific objects or things in the mini-world that are
represented in the database.
An entity may be person, place or object.
In ER diagram entity is represented as rectangles.
Example:
Employee and Department are entities and represented as rectangle
6
Cont..
An entity type defines a collection of entities that have the same attributes.
An entity instance is a single item in this collection.
An entity set is a set of entity instances.
Examples:
 Entity type: STUDENT
 Entity instance: Student with ID number CS08
 Entity set: Collection of all students
 In a database, an entity set is represented by the Table.
Example: Student table (Entity set)
i.e. each students in the table represents
Entity instance (just entity)
7
Types of entity set
Strong Entity: An entity set that has a primary key using which, entities
in the table can be uniquely identified.
Strong entity set is also known as a regular entity set.
In an ER diagram,
The strong entity set is represented by the rectangle and
The primary key is underlined with the solid line.
Example: Student is strong entity set having primary key.
8
Cont..
Weak entity: A weak entity set doesn’t have any primary key which can
identify each entity in a set distinctly.
But, for discriminating the entities in a set, the weak entity set
is dependent on a particular strong entity set.
The relation between a weak entity set and a strong entity set is said to
be identifying relationship.
The weak entity is shown by a rectangle in an ER diagram. But, the
attributes of weak entity set are underlined with the dashed line.
9
Cont..
A weak entity is also said to be existence dependent as for the existence of
its entities it has to be dependent on identifying entity set i.e. a particular
„strong entity set‟.
The relationship of a weak entity set and strong entity set is shown with
the double diamond as shown in the figure below:
10
Attributes
An attribute is a property or characteristic of an entity type.
We describe an entity with a set of attributes
Examples:
 STUDENT = {Reg. No, Fname , LName, Address, Phone, Email, DOB}
 ORDER = {Order ID, Date of Order, Amount of Order}
 ACCOUNT = {Account No, Account type, Balance}
 CITY = {Name, State, Population}
11
Types of Attributes
Attributes can be simple, multivalued, composite, stored, or derived
attributes.
Example: Student attributes in ER diagram.
12
Cont..
A set of attributes describe an entity.
A particular instance of an attribute is called a value.
For example, “Employee Id” and “Name” are the attributes of the
“EMPLOYEES” entity set; and “Jones” is one value of the attribute
“Name”.
The domain of an attribute is the collection of all possible values an
attribute can have. The domain of “Name” is a character string
13
Cont..
Attributes can be classified as identifiers or descriptors.
Identifiers: more commonly called keys, uniquely identify an instance of
an entity.
Example: “Employee Id” uniquely identifies an employee entity from the
entity set.
Descriptor: describes a non-unique characteristic of an entity instance.
Example: “Name” is a descriptor for the “EMPLOYEES” entity set.
14
Simple vs composite attributes
A simple or an atomic attribute cannot be further divided into smaller
components.
Example:
Age
Gender
A composite attribute, however, can be divided into smaller subparts
where each subpart is either atomic or composite.
Examples:
 Name: First Name, Last Name
 Address: Street, City, State, ZipCode
15
Single valued vs multi valued attributes
Single-valued attributes have a single value for an entity instance.
Examples:
 Date Of Birth
 Reg. No
Multi-valued attributes, on the other hand, may have more than one value
for an entity instance.
In ER model, it is represented by doubled ellipse.
Examples:
 Languages: Stores the names of the languages that a student speaks
 College Degree: BSC., MSC. ,M.Tech. ,PHD, etc.
 Phone number: Mobile phone , Office phone , Home phone
16
Stored vs derived attributes
The value of a derived attribute can be determined by analyzing other
attributes
It is denoted with a dashed ellipse
Example:
Age: Can derived from the current date and the attribute Date_of_Birth
An attribute whose value cannot be derived from the values of other
attributes is called a stored attribute.
NULL Values the meaning of the former type of NULL is not applicable ,
NULL can also be used if we do not know the value of an attribute for a
particular entity
17
Key attributes
A key attribute (or identifier) is a single attribute or a combination of
attributes that uniquely identify an individual instance of an entity type.
Underlined in an E-R diagram.
Example: studentID is a key attribute uniquely identifying the student.
18
Candidate key attribute
Sometimes no single attribute can uniquely identify an instance of an entity
type
A composite key is a composite attribute that uniquely identifies each
entity instance.
Example: composite key attribute
 City: {Name, State}
19
Relationships
A relationship is an association, a linkage or a connection between or
among entities.
Example:
 INSTRUCTOR “teaches” COURSE
 STUDENT “takes” COURSES
 CUSTOMER “has” ACCOUNT
A relationships of the same type are grouped into relationship type
A relationship type is represented by diamond connected to relating entities
by lines.
A relationship should have a name , an optionality (optional or mandatory)
and a cardinality.
20
Cont..
Example: CUSTOMER “has” ACCOUNT
Relationship between CUSTOMER and ACCOUNT entities
21
Cont..
There are different notations for E-R diagrams.
The notation used in the previous slide is called Chen’s notation.
Other notations are also used. The notation shows below is called
Crow’s-feet notation.
Relationship between CUSTOMER and ACCOUNT entities
22
Cont..
Attributes of Relationships: An attribute on a relationship stores
information related to the relationship.
 Much like attributes on entity types
Example of an Attribute of a Relationship
23
Degree of Relationship
The number of entity sets that participate in a relationship is called the
degree of relationship.
Three common degrees in a database:
Unary (degree 1) –Recursive relationship
 An association between two instances of the same entity type
 R є E1 x E1
 E.g. An employee supervises another employee
24
Role names in a recursive relationship
25
Cont..
Recursive relationship is a kind of relationship when an entity type relates
to itself.
In this case role names are essential to distinguish the meaning of each
participation in the relationship.
In the slide given above the mark “1” represents the Supervisor role , and
the mark “2” represents the Supervisee role.
Hence from the diagram in the previous slide we can easily know
 e1 supervises e2 and e3
 e3 supervises e5 and e6
26
Binary relationship
Binary (degree 2) – Most relationship sets in a DB System are
 An association between two different entity types
 R є E1 x E2
 E.g. Customer has bank Account
27
Ternary relationship
Ternary (degree 3)
 An association among three different entity types
 R є E1 x E2 x E3
 E.g. A bank employee who has a specific job in a bank branch
28
Unary relationship more examples
29
Binary relationship extra examples
30
Ternary relationship extra examples
31
,
32
Constraints on relationship
The cardinality of a relationship defines the number of instances of one
entity type that can be associated with instances of another entity type.
The maximum cardinality of a relationship defines the maximum
number of instances of one entity type that can be associated with instances
of another entity type.
33
Maximum Cardinality
Relationship types by maximum cardinality:
One-to-One
One-to-Many
Many-to-One
Many-to-Many
Relationship Types Based on Maximum Cardinality
34
Cont..
How do you know the maximum cardinality between two entity types?
Let‟s say we have 2 entity types called X and Y
Two important questions:
 Q1. Can an instance of X be associated with more than one instance of Y?
 Q2. Can an instance of Y be associated with more than one instance of X?
 The 2 questions above have 4 possible answers. Those answers determine the type of maximum
cardinalities
35
Maximum Cardinality
One-2-One Relationship:
 An entity in X is associated with at most one entity in Y, and vice versa.
 E.g. Each passenger has his own Ticket
One -2-Many Relationship
An entity in X is associated with any number(zero or more) of entities can associate with at most

one entity in X
E.g. A department contains many employees who work under it

36
Cont..
Many -2-One Relationship
 An entity in X is associated with at most one entity in Y. But an entity in Y can be
associated with any number (zero or more ) of entities in X.
 E.g. Many needles can be injected into a single patient
Many-2-Many Relationship
An entity in X is associated with any number(zero or more) of entities in Y ,and an

entity in Y is associated with any number (zero or more ) of entities in X
37
Many to one relationship example
38
Many to many relationship example
39
Cont..
Cardinality Limits of a Relationship: The credential limit of a relationship
is labeled as:
 0..* or 0..∞ indicating zero or more participation of the entity in the
relationship.
 1..* or 1..∞ indicating one or more participation of the entity in the
relationship.
 0..1 indicating zero or one participation of the entity in the
relationship.
 1..1 indicating exactly one participation of the entity in the
relationship
40
Cont..
Does the E-R diagram given below provide sufficient information ?
 What is the minimum number of employees who manage a department?
 What is the minimum number of departments that are managed by an
employee?
 Is it must for an employee to be a manager of a department?
 Is it must for a department to have an employee?
41
Minimum cardinality
The minimum cardinality of a relationship is defined as the minimum
number of instances of one entity type that must be associated with each
instance of another entity type.
Minimum cardinality is also called participation constraint or
existence dependency constraints. There are 2 types of participation
constraints:
1.Total participation
2.Partial participation
42
Total Participation
In total participation , each entity in the entity set occurs in at least one
relationship in the relationship set.
The example below shows that the participation of the entity set Department in the
relationship set Manages is total . This is because every department must have a
manager .
43
Partial Participation
In partial participation , some entities (not all entities) in the entity set
occurs in the relationship in the relationship set.
The example below shows that the participation of the entity set Student in
the relationship set Leader is partial because it is not possible for every
student entity to be a leader
44
Alternative ER Notations
ER Notations:
45
Cont..
46
ER Diagram Example (1)
47
Example 1 (continued)
The ER diagram given above (Example 1) shows the relationship named
Study In between two entities, Student and College.
This is a many to many relationship. Student entity has three attributes,
Stud_id, Stud name, Stud addr, which are represents its corresponding
properties of Studen entity.
Similarly, College entity has Col_id for college id and Col name for the
name of the college.
Stud_id is the key attribute of Student entity and Col_id is the key attribute
of College entity.
48
Example (2)
49
Example 2 (continued..)
In the ER diagram (Example 2), Products, trainers are the strong entities
and the Parts entity is a weak entity.
Because Parts entity depends on Products entity on a relationship of
Belongs to for its existence.
And also parts entity related with trainer entity through a relationship
named maintained by part_id and part name are two attributes of parts entity
and its key attributes are part_id.
Part_id and part name are the attributes of the products entity and its key
attribute is part-id.
Similarly, trainer_id and trainer name are the attributes of a trainer and its
key attribute is trainer_id.
50
Example 3
51
Example 3 (continued..)
In the ER diagram (example 3), some important types of attributes are
specified.
Reads are the relationship between two entities namely student and book.
The student entity has a key attribute of stud_id, a composite attribute of
stud_name with the components such as first name, middle name, and last
name., multivalued attribute f phone and derived attribute of age with its
base attribute of DOB.
Similarly, the book entity has a key attribute of book_id, a multivalued
attribute of authors, and other two attributes such as book_name and price.
52
Database Application example (Company database)
Company Database
We need to create a database schema design based on the
following (simplified) requirements of the COMPANY Database:
The company is organized into DEPARTMENTs. Each department has
a name, number and an employee who manages the department. We
keep track of the start date of the department manager. A department may
have several locations.
Each department controls a number of PROJECTs. Each project has a
unique name, unique number and is located at a single location.
53
Company database example (continued)
We store each EMPLOYEE‟s social security number, address, salary, sex,
and birthdate.
Each employee works for one department but may work on several projects.
We keep track of the number of hours per week that an employee currently works on
each project.
We also keep track of the direct supervisor of each employee.
Each employee may have a number of DEPENDENTs.
For each dependent, we keep track of their name, sex, birthdate, and relationship to
the employee.
54
ER Diagram (For the company database schema)
55
Keys and Constraints
Some of the commonly used classifications of database constraints are:
1. Keys – are attributes or set of attributes that can be used to uniquely
identify an entity within the entity set. A key in E/R model is represented by
underlining the attributes belonging to the key
2. Single-value constraints – are requirements that specify a given attribute
or set of attributes are unique in certain context.
3. Referential integrity constraints – are requirements for an existence of an
entity in the database so as it can be referenced by a certain relationship.
Referential integrity in E/R model is represented by a rounded arrow head
pointing to the entity set required for existence.
56
Cont..
4. Domain constraints – are requirements on an attribute value to be in a
specified range of values. No specific notation, but side marks may be used to
represent domain constraints.
5. Participation constraints – are assertions whether the participation of an
entity in a relationship is total or partial.
Keys as described above keys are attributes or set of attributes that suffice to
distinguish entities from each other.
A super key also know as super set is then a set of one or more attributes that in
group (collectively) can identify an entity uniquely from the entity set.
Example: Consider the “EMPLOYEES” entity set, then
- “EmpId”, “EmpId, Name”, “NationalId”, “NationalId, BDate”, … are super keys
“Name”, “BDate” are NOT super keys
57
Cont..
A candidate key is an attribute (or set of attributes) that uniquely identifies
a row. A candidate key must possess the following properties:
 Unique identification - For every row the value of the key must
uniquely identify that row.
 Non redundancy - No attribute in the key can be discarded without
destroying the property of unique identification.
58
Cont..
A primary key is the candidate key which is selected as the principal
unique identifier. Every relation must contain a primary key. The primary
key is usually the key selected to identify a row when the database is
physically implemented
A foreign key is an attribute (or set of attributes) that appears (usually) as a
non key attribute in one relation and as a primary key attribute in another
relation
59
Mapping ER Diagram to Relations
60
What is well structured relation?
A relation that contains a minimum amount of redundancy and
Allows users to insert, modify and delete the rows without errors or
inconsistencies.
61
Steps to transform ER model into Relations
It is useful to transform the conceptual data model into a set of normalized
relations.
Steps:
i. Represent entity types as relations and their attributes as the column.
ii. Represent relationships in an appropriate way
iii. Normalize the relations if required
iv. Merge the relations if required
62
Example
63
Converting regular entities into relations
Composite attributes: Use only their simple, component attributes
Multi-valued Attribute - Becomes a separate relation with a foreign key
taken from the superior entity.
64
Cont..
a. Multivalued attribute becomes a separate relation with foreign key.
b.1:M relationship between original entity and new relation
65
Converting weak entity types into relations
Becomes a separate relation with a foreign key taken from the owner entity
type.
Primary key composed of:
• Partial identifier of weak entity
• Primary key of strong entity
66
Converting Unary Relationships into Relations
Unary 1:N Relationships
• Relationship between instances of a single entity type
• Utilize a recursive foreign key
• A foreign key in a relation that references the primary key values of that
same relation
Unary M:N Relationships
• Create a separate relation
• Primary key of new relation is a composite of two attributes that both take their
values from the same primary key
67
Cont..
Mapping a Unary 1:N
Relationship
EMPLOYEE relation with
recursive foreign key
68
Converting Binary Relationships into Relations
Binary 1:1
Three possible options:
a. Add the primary key of A as a foreign key of B
b. Add the primary key of B as a foreign key of A
c. Both
69
Cont..
In an One-to-One relationship, two table to avoid redundancy issues
70
Cont..
Binary 1:N Relationships
• Add the primary key attribute (or attributes) of the entity type on the “ONE” side
of the relationship as a foreign key into the relation on the “MANY” side.
• The primary key on the “one” side migrates to the “many” side . The foreign key is
always added into the “Many” side
71
Cont..
Binary M:N relationships:
Create a new table that has a primary key which is the combination of the primary
keys of all the participating entity types . Those added primary keys also act as
foreign keys in the new table .
All descriptive attributes of the relationship type among the participating entity
types must also be included in the new table.
The primary key must satisfy the following two conditions
 The value of the key must uniquely identify every row relation
 The key should be non redundant
72
Cont..
Example:
73
Mapping Ternary Relationships into Relations
One relation for each entity and one for the associative entity.
Associative entity has foreign keys to each entity in the relationship
74
Mapping Subtype/Supertype Relationships
75
Enhanced Entity Relationship(EER) Model
EER is high level data model
EER is the extension of ER model
Why do we needed it?
Some of the aspects of database such as inheritance among various entities can‟t be
expressed using basic ER model.These aspects uses Enhanced ER(EER) model.
EER model concepts mainly concers

Sub class and Super class
Specialization and Generalization
76
Cont.…
Aggregation
Union or Category
EER model includes all modelling concepts of ER model.
From different concepts of EER model, generalization and specialization
included.
Specialization is based on what the role they play in an organization.
Example: An employee can be may be developer or tester or any other so that
This employee can be divided into subgroups.
77
Cont.…
78
Cont….
From the above diagram
Specilazation is the process that defines group entites in which divided into
subgroups
It is the top down approach
And also in which one higher entity is broked down into lower entites.
79
Cont…
80
Cont…
From the above diagram
Generalization is the process of generalizing the entities which contains
the properties of all generalized entities
 In which two or more low level entities combined into single high level
It is the bottom up approach
It is the reverse process of specialization.
81
End of Chapter 3
82