Mettu University
Fundamentals of Database System
Chapter 7: Relational Model &Relational Algebra
Compiled by: Diriba G. (MSc. in CSE)
1
Outline
Introduction to;

Relational model and Relational algebra

Relational algebra operations

Selection

Projection

Cartesian product

Union and Set difference

Different relational Algebra Operations from Set theory and additional

operation with example
2
What is Relational Model refers to?
 Relational model supports simple, powerful query languages in which
allows manipulation and retrieval of data from a database.
3
Relational Model Terminology
Tuple is a row of a relation.
Degree is the number of attributes in a relation.
Cardinality is the number of tuples in a relation.
Relational Database is a collection of normalized relations with distinct
relation names.
4
Instances of Branch and Staff (part) Relations
5
Database Relations
Relation schema
Named relation defined by a set of attribute and domain name pairs.
Relational database schema
Set of relation schemas, each with a distinct name.
6
Properties of Relations
Relation name is distinct from all other relation names in relational schema.
Each cell of relation contains exactly one atomic (single) value.
Each attribute has a distinct name.
Values of an attribute are all from the same domain.
Each tuple is distinct; there are no duplicate tuples.
Order of attributes has no significance.
Order of tuples has no significance, theoretically.
7
Relational Algebra
 Relational algebra is a formal language associated with the relational
model.
 we may describe the relational algebra as procedural language in which
user tells the system exactly what and how to manipulate the data. And also
it can be used to tell the DBMS how to build a new relation from one or
more relations in the database.
8
Relational algebra operations
The basic set of operations for the relational model is known as the
relational algebra. These operations enable a user to specify basic retrieval
requests.
There are different basic operations that could be applied on relations based
on the requirement. However these five operation listed below are the most
important and basic operations in relational algebra:
These operations are:
9
Cont.…
Selection. It selects a subset of rows from a relation.
Projection. Deletes unwanted columns from a relation
Cartesian product. Allows to concatenate a tuple from one relation with all
the tuples from the other relation.
Union. Tuples in relation R1, or in relation R2 .
 Set Difference. Tuples in relation R1, but not in relation R2
 These operations perform most of the data retrieval needed. And also there is
Join, Intersection which can be expressed in terms of this 5 basic operations.
10
Cont..
11
Cont..
12
Relational Algebra Operations from Set Theory: SET DIFFERENCE (cont.)
SET DIFFERENCE (also called MINUS or EXCEPT) is denoted by R – S
The result of R – S, is a relation that includes all tuples that are in R but not
in S
The attribute names in the result will be the same as the attribute names
in R
The two operand relations R and S must be ―type compatible‖
13
Some properties of UNION, INTERSECT, and SET DIFFERENCE
Notice that both union and intersection are commutative operations; that is
R  S = S  R, and R  S = S  R
Both union and intersection can be treated as n-ary operations applicable to any number
of relations as both are associative operations; that is
R  (S  T) = (R  S)  T
(R  S)  T = R  (S  T)
The minus operation is not commutative; that is, in general
R – S ≠ S – R
14
Relational Algebra Operations from Set Theory: CARTESIAN PRODUCT
CARTESIAN (or CROSS) PRODUCT Operation
This operation is used to combine tuples from two relations in a
combinatorial fashion.
Denoted by R(A1, A2, . . ., An) x S(B1, B2, . . ., Bm)
Result is a relation Q with degree n + m attributes:
Q(A1, A2, . . ., An, B1, B2, . . ., Bm), in that order.
The resulting relation state has one tuple for each combination of
tuples—one from R and one from S.
15
Cont..
Hence, if R has n tuples (denoted as |R| = n ), and S has n tuples, then R
R R S
x S will have n * n tuples.
R S
The two operands do NOT have to be "type compatible‖
16
Binary Relational Operations: JOIN
JOIN Operation (denoted by )
The sequence of CARTESIAN PRODECT followed by SELECT is used
quite commonly to identify and select related tuples from two relations
A special operation, called JOIN combines this sequence into a single
operation
17
Cont..
This operation is very important for any relational database with more than
a single relation, because it allows us combine related tuples from various
relations
The general form of a join operation on two relations R(A1, A2, . . ., An)
and S(B1, B2, . . ., Bm) is R S
<join condition>
where R and S can be any relations that result from general relational
algebra expressions.
18
Some properties of JOIN
Consider the following JOIN operation:
R(A1, A2, . . ., An) S(B1, B2, . . ., Bm)
R.Ai=S.Bj
Result is a relation Q with degree n + m attributes:
Q(A1, A2, . . ., An, B1, B2, . . ., Bm), in that order.
The resulting relation state has one tuple for each combination of tuples—r
from R and s from S, but only if they satisfy the join condition r[Ai]=s[Bj]
Hence, if R has n tuples, and S has n tuples, then the join result will
R S
generally have less than n * n tuples.
R S
Only related tuples (based on the join condition) will appear in the result
19
Cont…
The general case of JOIN operation is called a Theta-join: R S
theta
The join condition is called theta
Theta can be any general boolean expression on the attributes of R and S;
for example:
R.Ai<S.Bj AND (R.Ak=S.Bl OR R.Ap<S.Bq)
Most join conditions involve one or more equality conditions ―AND‖ed
together; for example:
R.Ai=S.Bj AND R.Ak=S.Bl AND R.Ap=S.Bq
20
Binary Relational Operations: EQUIJOIN
EQUIJOIN Operation
The most common use of join involves join conditions with equality
comparisons only. Such a join, where the only comparison operator used is
=, is called an EQUIJOIN.
In the result of an EQUIJOIN we always have one or more pairs of
attributes (whose names need not be identical) that have identical values
in every tuple.
21
Binary Relational Operations: NATURAL JOIN Operation
NATURAL JOIN Operation is another variation of JOIN called NATURAL
JOIN was created to get rid of the second (superfluous) attribute in an
EQUIJOIN condition.
because one of each pair of attributes with identical values is superfluous
The standard definition of natural join requires that the two join attributes, or
each pair of corresponding join attributes, have the same name in both relations
If this is not the case, a renaming operation is applied first.
22
Complete Set of Relational Operations
The set of operations including SELECT , PROJECT  , UNION ,
DIFFERENCE -, RENAME , and CARTESIAN PRODUCT X is called a
complete set because any other relational algebra expression can be
expressed by a combination of these five operations.
For example:
R  S = (R  S ) – ((R - S)  (S - R))
R S =  (R X S)
<join condition> <join condition>
23
Recap of Relational Algebra Operations
.
24
Additional Relational Operations (cont.)
 As we have seen in previous section there are five basic operation of
relational algebra. In additional to these different types of join operations
were exist. For instance in natural join and equijoin, tuples without a
matching (or related) tuple are eliminated from the join result
Tuples with null in the join attributes are also eliminated
This amounts to loss of information.
25
cont.
A set of operations, called OUTER joins, can be used when we want to
keep all the tuples in R, or all those in S, or all those in both relations in the
result of the join, regardless of whether or not they have matching tuples in
the other relation.
The left outer join operation keeps every tuple in the first or left relation R
in R S; if no matching tuple is found in S, then the attributes of S in the
join result are filled or ―padded‖ with null values.
26
Cont...
A similar operation, right outer join, keeps every tuple in the second or right
relation S in the result of R S.
A third operation, full outer join, that keeps all tuples in both the left and
the right relations when no matching tuples are found, padding them with
null values as needed.
27
Cont.…
OUTER UNION Operations
The outer union operation was developed to take the union of tuples from two
relations if the relations are not type compatible.
This operation will take the union of tuples in two relations R(X, Y) and S(X,
Z) that are partially compatible, meaning that only some of their attributes,
say X, are type compatible.
The attributes that are type compatible are represented only once in the result,
and those attributes that are not type compatible from either relation are also
kept in the result relation T(X, Y, Z).
28
Cont.…
Example Consider the following relations to understand additional join
operation in relational algebra.The first one is student relation which has the
following properties with certain records and the second is course relation
which has also different properties.
29
Cont.…
A). Natural join operation.
B).Left –outer Join Operation
30
Cont.…
A). Right outer join operation.
B).Full outer join Operation
31
End of Chapter 7
32